Morning tea
Oh.
Speaking to you for the first time, aren't I?
Yes.
You're on morning team.
Yes, sir.
You're on morning, because it ... You're joking?
No.
Good morning.
We are live. We're in public. We've sorted ourselves out.
Minister, thank you for joining us, and your officials, for the hearing with you,
budget estimates for tertiary education.
We have an hour with you this morning, so as a result, we have about three
minutes for your opening introduction.
We'll leave it with you, and then we'll open for questions. Thank you.
Thank you. Well, it's a pleasure to be here with you, and
I'll just introduce officials with me here at the table.
A number are behind us, and if they come up, they can introduce themselves.
But Jillian Dudgeon from TEC, acting CE
there.
Good morning.
And Andy from the-
Correct
... ministry. You probably know both of them, but it's good
to have everyone introduced. Look, I thought I'd just very
quickly scamper through some introductory statements and then, as you
said, we'll go straight into questions.
Mm.
So,
you'll be aware just how important tertiary education is
for building our productive economy-
Mm
... and our Going for Growth government objective.
It's really important that our tertiary education system
serves our New Zealanders, but also that our
providers are able to manage their costs as well in what
is a pretty constrained economic environment for us all.
So we're very focused on getting our best bang for money.
As part of this Budget 2026, we're investing
that 367.7 million in operating
funding over the next four years for tertiary education,
and we're also looking at areas where
things, objectives haven't been achieved that were hoped for.
Obviously, the Fees Free scheme is one area that we
looked at and decided that we could reallocate some of the
funding from there into areas of more current demand.
And certainly, looking at that Youth Guarantee space has
been critical for us.
We are also very focused on students that are enrolling in foundation
courses, and you'll see the 2% increase that occurred there.
We're funding 99% of the forecast volume from the
ministry's forecast, and we've also
allowed, or are proposing to allow, the annual maximum fee
movement of up to 6% for 2027.
That will bring it broadly in line with the inflation that's
occurred from 2018 to
now. So perhaps that's enough from me, and perhaps just
now move on to questions.
Wonderful. Well, we have the first question from Carl Bates, then we move on to
Shannon, and then Francisco.
Thanks very much, Chair, and welcome, Minister.
Thank you.
I wanted to talk about the Youth Guarantee places-
Mm
... and understand why you've added more of those in this year's
budget.
Yeah. So Youth Guarantees, we're doing a lot of work in that space.
There's, as you all know, a high number of NEETs, those under
25 not in employment, education, or training.
Really important that we have the capacity there to
grow those numbers, so we're looking at an additional 1,000 over
the budget period. And that Youth
Guarantee space gives real support to those
young people who haven't achieved in the compulsory sector.
So it's for under 25-year-olds, and they need to be studying
at levels one to three and not have achieved the
qualifications in the compulsory sector.
So look, it's an area where,
of course, there's major changes going on in the compulsory sector
to put in things like vocational pathways, changing the
qualifications there that we expect will
address a lot of
NEETs, future NEETs, and prevent future NEETs.
But we are left with this fairly big
number, cohort of young people that haven't achieved
qualifications while they were in the compulsory sector who need
that support now. And
Youth Guarantees is an interesting space.
There's a couple of ways in which it is delivered.
So some
are delivering very foundational numeracy and literacy, reading, writing,
maths, and they do it in a full cohort of Youth
Guarantees. It can also be delivered as
Youth Guarantee places within another program.
For example, a pre-employment construction program where they
might be
sitting alongside fee-paying students.
And so we have announced that we're doing a review
into the whole Youth Guarantee space.
We know that it assists those young
people that are in it because it has that wraparound support.
They don't pay fees. They don't pay for the
materials that are used in their courses.
They get additional support with transport and
additional pastoral care. So we
know that it helps them, but we need to have a look at just
how we need to deliver for the different cohorts that come into
there. And we'll be spending the next 18 months having
a look at that, but in the meantime, we are increasing those 1,000
places, which will take it up to around
5,500 Youth Guarantee places. We know that they
are oversubscribed now in the sector, so it's
easing some of that pressure that's there now.
Thank you. Supplementary.
Thanks, Chair. So Minister, in provincial regions
like Whanganui, where NEETs tend to be higher-
Mm
... what will this Youth Guarantee-
Program funding do to supporting the reduction
of those NEET numbers?
So providers will be seeking those additional
spaces, and TEC will have that job, that task
of allocating those additional spaces out.
And we do know. We know where the
highest NEET numbers are. Obviously, the far north, very high
numbers, also the east coast, very high numbers. But yes, you're right.
In some of those regional spaces, there are higher numbers.
So the providers, particularly the PTEs and
the polytechnics, will seek where they know
that there is demand to get additional spaces to take in those
extra young people.
Thank you.
So we have a supplementary from Francisco, then from Jo, and then
Panji. Mm-hmm.
Thank you, Chair, and congratulations on the reunified portfolio,
Minister.
Thank you.
I've got a couple of supps around this.
The first is,
obviously you've funded 1,000 placements.
Mm-hmm.
What was the modeled demand for it?
You've only funded 1,000-
Yeah
... and there's around
163,000 NEETS, around 100.
Yeah. Look, it's not going to meet all the demand-
Absolutely
... all the NEETS that are there. But we certainly know from
TEC's analysis
where there was unfunded demand across the sector.
It's a little bit like the missing male.
You don't know how many would be there because you haven't got them in the
system yet. But we know that those
1,000 places will be highly sought after.
So how is that figure of 1,000 arrived at?
Was that what was calculated to be the
places that would get filled up, and was there another figure that was calculated
that would've-
Were there other options?
Yeah.
Look, we didn't look at any sort of
number of options. We thought 1,000 was a good,
substantial increase,
and obviously there are other budgets in that budget in the four-year period
that can be looked at again. But it was really
based on
the unmet demand that
the providers are saying to us, "We've hit our cap.
We think we could take more."
Right. And I appreciate that's a figure of unmet demand.
But that calculation of 1,000, that was basically just a finger
in the air type calculation that wasn't based on any advice or analysis.
Well, there was advice, obviously, from TEC, but
it was a good figure of a substantial increase,
taking it up to 5,500 overall.
Yes.
Thank you. A supplementary from Jo Luxton.
Thank you. I've got a couple of supps on that.
So 100,000 in total, and you've increased it by
1,000 based on what I think sounds a bit like
reckons, actually. So
how
are you going to determine exactly who gets what
spaces other than
areas that have high need? And
how is only 1,000 going to make any real difference
to 100,000?
Well, I won't decide at all because my arms length from it.
No, not you. But how will it be decided is the question.
So TEC will, and TEC will have those
applications coming in from the providers.
They will be having those negotiations with the providers in terms
of ... Well, no.
Yes.
I probably should let you take one of the criteria.
Okay. Yeah, Minister. Yeah, how will it be-
So we'll have a process where we'll go out to the sector and ask them to come
back and apply for those places. We've already had actually
a couple of conversations with very small providers that want nine NEFs.
Nine NEFs, a small amount, because a lot of those YG
cohorts are quite small, so you need to build up the
capacity in a sort of measured way.
But we'll go out to the sector, and they'll tell us how many they need, and then
we'll allocate it out.
Great.
Minister, if I might comment briefly on the-
You can
... the forecast.
Yes.
Thank you. So the 100,000 number of NEETS is
obviously a statistic that's produced by the Ministry of Business Innovation and
Employment, but just to break that down a little bit, it's a point in time
measure that's taken four times a year.
Mm-hmm.
So they're literally counting the number of people who are not in education or
employment at that time within a youth population.
Then a lot of those people are only not in employment or
training for a very brief period. So for example, the NEET number
bounces up significantly in the first quarter of each calendar year-
Yeah
... after everybody leaves school or university and before they work out what to do
next. So the number we worry about is the youth NEET
population, which is significantly smaller than that.
I don't have the exact number, but I'm happy to supply that to you.
There we go.
Sorry, the long-term NEET population. Apologies.
Yeah.
So it's the people who are NEET for more than six months,
and of that group, there are a very broad range of
government programs, including MSD, employment services programs,
as well as Youth Guarantee that support them.
So the
population we're trying to support with Youth Guarantee is
quite a small subset of that 100,000.
Yeah.
So 1,000 additional spaces given that we've got the highest
youth unemployment we've seen in 20 years, and you can only increase it by
1,000 at the most.
Well, I think we've given the explanation that it's not trying to
address the whole 100,000.
Thank you. And we have a supplementary question from Panji Kumar.
Thank you. Minister, the Fees Free scheme that is
going to be abolished now, and the Youth Guarantee space, which is going to get
part of that funding from that.
Yeah, that's a different-
Sorry. Panji, do you mind? We're just going to stick on the Youth Guarantee.
Yeah, this is about Youth Guarantee space.
Okay.
Yeah.
The Fees Free.
So because the money from that is coming to Youth Guarantee space, that is my
question here. So I want to understand from you
what is it that we would have missed if the
Fees Free scheme was not abolished in this Youth Guarantee space?
We've been able to fund it from elsewhere.
Well, we didn't look at that. We saw it as an opportunity to
reinvest from stopping the fees-free scheme.
And the supplementary, Carl.
Thanks, Chair.
Minister, you made the point that you're not trying to address all of the 100,000
through this. Can you just give the committee a sense of, from the tertiary
education budget, the range of things the government is intending
on doing to address a lift-up and an improvement in tertiary
education across New Zealand?
Yes. Look, there is a range of things, and things
like the money that's also going into, for example, the Industry
Skills Board, ensuring that we get that seamless
progression from secondary school into tertiary.
So ensuring that the Industry Skills Board ...
So,
it received an additional three million, coming from the
ABI
money that was left there. It ensures that the
industry entity, the Industry Skills Boards that are
developing the tertiary qualifications are
also developing the vocational pathway
qualifications for the secondary school.
So making sure that industry, same industry
bodies, are involved in both the tertiary programs, the secondary
programs, so we're getting that seamless pathway and
ensuring that our young people can see that
pathway in the vocational space right from secondary
school into tertiary. And I think that's really important
because
we've seen this big cohort of NEATS.
These are people that have been failed, quite frankly, in the
compulsory system, and I think that the previous government
needs to take some responsibility for that, where numeracy-
I remember that
... literacy, foundation skills-
Obviously
... were not being
... Those young people were not getting sufficient skills in that area.
Yep.
So making sure that we've got that seamless pathway across
secondary and tertiary.
Thank you.
Thank you, Minister. We come to our next primary question, Shannon Halbert.
Thank you, Minister. How many million dollar less is this
budget compared to 2025, 2026?
Well, actually, it's more, but we had this discussion last
time, so I will go directly to the amount of money.
And you were wrong last time, but for this time-
Well-
I'll put you-
Can we just get the question?
Yeah, we were both right, just different perspectives.
So I'm referring to page four of the OAG
report.
No. Shannon, sorry. You can't refer to an OAG document in a
public hearing.
No. Back to basic.
Because they don't see the funds which aren't there.
So just from your own knowledge.
I'll refer back to the primary question.
Yep. There you go.
If you want to be like that, then-
No, it's true.
Well, you're allowed to say I'm wrong. It's a fact.
So-
The question, Minister, is how many million dollars less are you spending
on tertiary education this round compared to last round?
Well, obviously there are some things that we aren't funding.
So we're not funding the fees-free, so that is out of it.
How much is that less?
It's about 360-odd million a year generally.
It varies over ...
Each time it's been about a billion, over a billion over the period-
Sure
... that it's been in place,
which is a billion dollars that was spent on achieving nothing.
So-
Of course
... we should look at things like that.
So when we spoke to the sector, the thing that they were
most focused on was ensuring that-
Sorry, that's not relative to the question
... the additional volume-
Sorry.
No, well, it is. I'm talking about the-
The question is how many million dollars less are you spending on tertiary
education?
Well, I'm giving you the information about where we're spending more and
where we've taken money out. So obviously we've taken the fees-free money
out. Where we're spending more is on where the sector wanted
more funding, and that was in volume.
So additional volume is 284 million.
And so then there's been additional funding going to the Industry
Skills Board. There's been the additional 2% that's gone
into adjusting the funding rates for
foundation. There's been an additional
86.9 million in the youth guarantees
and
there's a little bit that's left over having to finish off the fees-free.
So there has been additional funding where the
sector has said they wanted additional funding.
Where we have considered programs that were not meeting the objectives,
yes, we've taken them out.
Great.
So my understanding is that there's $57 million less being spent
on tertiary education. Do you agree with that?
There's ... Overall, there have been programs that we've reduced, and
obviously the fees-free was one of them, and that will count in
that net amount.
Okay.
Thank you. And how much exactly is being saved by
fees-free being cut?
Well, the net amount-
$1.1 billion you said was the total-
It's about ... Well, it varies-
How much would you say?
It varies from year to year.
Sorry. Members, it's really important.
I understand, but you've got the opportunity to have supplementary.
So if you could let the minister finish her answer, then ask your supplementary
rather than over the top.
I might not ask that one too.
Yeah? Sure.
So yes, obviously there is a net
savings from it. It's very hard-
How much?
... to say exactly how much each year is going to
be funded-
That's right
... from final year fees-free because it depends how many people actually
complete their qualification and how many would be funded from that.
But in total, I think it's about a billion over the period that the
fees-free was in place.
A billion dollars you have lost from the tertiary education fund-
Uh-
... that you promised to reallocate.
Well, no, it was never going to the providers.
A billion dollars never went to assist providers in
provision of tertiary education.
That was a billion dollars that the previous government put
into going back to individual students.
So if I add up the youth guarantees money, the- And the trades
academy money-
Yes, it doesn't match. It-
Is it correct that the amount of young people who will benefit from this
reinvestment is only 11,000?
It will be less. Yes, it will be less than benefited from the fees-free scheme.
How many students are impacted by the fees-free cuts at level three to
five?
At level three to five, I haven't got it specifically in those.
I don't think ... No.
We can get that number.
Yeah.
Yes, we can get that number for you.
And that would be great if we could get that-
Yes
... coming back to the committee afterwards.
Mm-hmm.
I have a supplementary from Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. In terms of the spend into tertiary
education, the opposition clearly are just looking at a number and
saying, "How much are you spending?"
Mm-hmm.
How much do you focus as the minister on the quality of spend-
Mm-hmm
... and the outcomes being achieved from the spend that you are
determining in the budget?
Yeah, look, exactly that. Yes,
the overall amount is less because it's a
billion dollars that was spent on a scheme that didn't achieve the
objectives that it had. A billion dollars spent on-
It didn't go anywhere else
... fees-free that didn't go to the providers to
enhance the quality of the provision of tertiary education.
It's a billion dollars that didn't get invested
in new programs and in any new equipment
or facilities-
Still not being invested
... in any providers. So it's looking at the quality
of the spend, given that we have a
interest-free loan
facility there for students. Fees-free for
final year in particular was coming off the loans.
It wasn't going into the pockets of any
students. It wasn't going into the providers.
So it was reducing the loan
facility that was there. So it's a matter of looking
at programs that weren't achieving their outcomes and
looking at where we should invest, and there is no argument, I don't believe,
that we should invest in NEATs when we have high numbers of NEATs,
when we've got a lot of young people who were failed, quite frankly,
by the system-
Very, very-
By the whole tertiary education system.
She's stating-
Can I just ...
Members, we have an order. I'll put you on it.
I've got a supplementary from Carl, then we've got one from Panjit, then Grant,
then Shannon, and then we've got your primary.
Yes .
But so, Minister, is it
reasonable to say then that
is essentially a billion dollars that we're not going to have to borrow, and
that my kids
and other kids, for members in the community around
New Zealand, are not going to have to pay for in the future?
Exactly. Yes. And with some of that funding
being reinvested into where we considered it was most needed,
into youth guarantees, into trades academies.
Great. Okay.
Okay.
If you-
Mine becomes a bit of a clarification question.
So, Minister, from the fees-free scheme, which we knew is not going to deliver
what it was promised, like it's going to deliver. It's gone now.
So that money partially it has been reinvested.
Mm-hmm.
So the remaining savings, are you saying that it's not going to be
reinvested, or how is it going to be used? Is there any plan there?
Just want to understand that.
So the remaining savings are savings to the center.
They are just savings. Yeah.
They are savings.
Okay.
Supplementary, Grant, and then Francisco.
Yeah, so just-
Carl was before Grant.
No, no he's not.
Shannon.
Yes.
Sorry, no. I-
That's not true, but that's okay. But you are before Francisco. Okay.
Sorry, I thought yours was a primary. Okay. Yeah.
Grant-
Thank you
... and then Shannon-
Thank you, Madam Chair
... Francisco.
So just going back to fees-free, did it
achieve its intent of increasing the number of students that
actually went to university from a wider range of New Zealanders to help those
lower up
people struggling to get to university?
So it was for all of tertiary education-
Yes
... obviously. And no-
Right. Okay
... it didn't appear to have increased the numbers that came from the lower
socioeconomic schools. It didn't increase the
completion rates. In fact, it seemed to do the opposite.
Yeah.
People were going and
then-
Giving it a go
... leaving.
Yeah.
Yeah. So no, it didn't achieve those objectives, and so it's a lot of
money. A billion dollars. That's a billion with a B spent
on a scheme that didn't meet its objectives.
Thank you.
And it would be remiss of us as a government not to look at a
significant amount of spending that wasn't meeting objectives.
Thank you.
Okay. So can I just check before we move on, Shannon, I've got you down now for the
next supplementary, then Francisco. We've got then Francisco with another primary.
Shannon, was yours another primary as well?
Yeah.
Thank you. Okay. Shannon, and then Francisco.
So on the supplementary, because you say you can't tell us what that
savings is. Is that correct?
So-
What the savings of fees-free-
Do you mean the ... Oh, no. Well, we can.
I haven't got it right in front of me.
Because it keeps on being raised today.
So the four-year saving from the abolition of the fees-free scheme,
including all of the impacts across the different votes, is a
billion and-
... 39.
Yeah. And so you're still missing about 900 odd
million. Where has that money been spent?
I'm sorry.
The minister just answered that. She said-
No. Sorry, Madam Chair. She hasn't answered-
Verifying
... answered that-
Oh, we're verifying
... because you do the cal-
That is-
So sorry. Can I just say, and correct me if I'm wrong, but I did just
hear you answer the question saying it's savings back to the Crown.
Yes.
Yes. Correct.
So that question's been answered.
How much a savings was the question, which is-
The minister just answered that. But if you-
The amount minus the amount-
No, she hasn't
... the amount-
You don't like the answer
Folks.
Minister, can you answer the question then?
Sorry, can I just go back to my supplementary?
Yes.
The $1 billion-
What is the savings, Minister?
So, the ending the zero fee scheme saved
$1 billion and $39 million.
Then there is the reprioritization of some of that funding,
first into the youth guarantees,
and then secondly, into trades academy.
So, some of it has gone across
the compulsory and the tertiary.
Thank you. So, out of that billion odd dollars-
Yes, the-
... what is the net loss that you are equating to
savings going back to the Crown?
I'm happy to provide you with that in
writing.
Roughly.
So around $87 million
of the
billion is going into the thousands youth guarantee places.
Mm.
And then the 10,000 fees free,
trades academy places, I don't have the number of exactly how much that costs
because the Vote Education estimate's hearing is tomorrow.
Yeah.
But what we can do is provide you with a reconciliation of those costs.
Great. We'll get that back in writing.
Yes. And my apologies because it's split across two votes.
The 86.9 is in mine, but then the other
amount is in the compulsory education.
Thank you. Supplementary question from Francisco.
Thank you, Chair. And just getting back to the figures that were
asked about earlier. If you look at the estimates of appropriations, it
looks like,
compared to the last year, where there was a
3.310719
allocation to the Vote Tertiary budget versus
3.27909 billion this year,
that there's been a cut of about 35.8 million
on actual terms. But if you account for inflation, a
real-term cut of 138 million.
This is occurring in the context of significant enrollments
and a significant increase in enrollments in both
polytech and tertiary education and also the
PTEs. Would the minister concede that the amount of funding per
student has gone down overall because of this?
No, because combined with the fees,
the AMFM being able to go up 6%
plus the
2% that's going into the foundation.
So you would say into foundation education.
It will vary across the levels and across the
disciplines. And so I think it would be difficult to say
overall that per student it's gone down.
You're talking about in terms of accounting for inflation.
There
has, of course, from the level
three to seven, not been that increase across
the board. But the sector were quite
sure that their concern was about funding the additional volume, which
is where the additional money has gone into, mainly.
Okay. We have a primary question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair. So how's the reestablishment of the 10 polytechs
that were stood up this year and the four remaining to be stood up next year going?
Yes, look, it's going well, Grant.
It's the 10 that have stood up. They're all doing very well
in terms of monitoring their financial progress and their academic
progress. TEC, I think,
hasn't flagged any real concerns with any of them.
They are having to be very careful, as is every business and every household
across the country. But they were set up with their
recapitalization funds, so they are working
carefully in terms of ensuring that they are working
with their communities, ensuring that they are providing the
programs that their communities need, and ensuring that they are
doing it in a cost-effective manner.
For the four that haven't stood up yet, the decisions have been
made about those, and so obviously Tai Poutini
on the west coast of the South Island,
that is going to be absorbed by Open
Polytechnic to ensure there's still provision over on the west
coast of the South Island. Which is really important because it's quite a
distance for those young people to be going over to Christchurch or up to
Nelson. And so ensuring that provision does
occur there in a blended manner and ensuring that the
provision can be extended, that's been a really important part
of having that merger with the Open
Polytechnic. The other three, NorthTec,
obviously, decisions have been made about substantial funding
going into there to ensure that they can really
start on a good footing, and that was really important to me, and
I know to the officials, that we do have high needs
numbers up in the far north. We do have some really significant
industry needs up in the far north.
So, that significant amount of funding, and I'm trying to remember whether it was
34 or 36 million.
34.
34 million. I don't want to give them too much.
He'll take it.
He'll take it. He'll take it.
So substantial funding going in there.
There is a really strong group of community leaders
who want that to be successful. They want to see a
fit for purpose facility in the center of
Whangarei, which is really meeting the needs of the community and
attracting those young people into it.
So, there's work there obviously to be done over the next two or
three years to get that all stood up, but they are in a good place.
They're getting a sound amount of funding to get there.
The other two,
certainly for WIT in Taranaki, they've done
some tremendous work there. And look, I have to commend the
staff at each of these organizations.
They've done a tremendous amount of work to get their
organizations ready to be stood up.
So they're doing a lot of work there.
And WelTec Whitireia, again, have done a lot of good work getting
themselves prepared to be able to stood up on January next year.
So I'm really pleased with the progress they've all made.
I think it's been a substantial change for them over a couple of years,
but I feel like they are really now fit for purpose.
And just a quick sup on that. So the importance of actually giving communities
ownership of their own tertiary education facilities like the
polytechs, how important has that been for you?
Both the communities and industries, I think, has been really critical,
and that's been the driving factor for me, that the center does not
know best. It's the communities and the industries that know best.
And so,
getting the industry board set up, skills board set up was really
critical. But getting key people in the community to
take ownership and understand that, for the benefit of
their industries, for the benefit of their young people, they must engage, and they
must ensure that their polytechnic is embedded and
integrated into their community. Absolutely critical.
Thank you.
Supplementary, Francisco.
Minister, I appreciate the
vision you have outlined for the polytech sector, but it doesn't seem
like the funding decisions you're making kind of reflect the
importance of the sector. If you look at the estimates of Appropriations
2026-27, this is page
227 of the Education and Workforce Sector B5,
volume two, it looks like the overall
funding that's going to ITPs has dropped by about
160 million from 2025 to the
2026-2027 budget. At the same time,
you've delivered a funding increase of 120 million to
private training establishments.
Can you explain the discrepancy between those figures?
Yeah. So, obviously, volume has a
significant impact on that. So the volume,
certainly during the Te Pukenga
period, the volume of
enrollments in the polytech sector went down considerably,
and so they are, in many cases, rebuilding.
The PTE sector, because
what
were industry training boards are turning into PTEs, there will be
additional funding going into there.
But they will be, in most cases, MITO and
BCITO are the two that have been stood up now.
They will be working through the other providers.
They won't be providing the delivery.
They are likely to be contracting through either the polytechnics or
other PTEs to do that delivery. So look, yes,
it was enormously damaging for the
polytech sector, the number of enrollments that went down over
that period.
They are going to be rebuilding, and
most of them are getting good numbers coming through now.
I think I'm misunderstanding something about your reply, Minister.
Oh, okay.
You said that
there was a fall in numbers during-
Yes, there was
... the Te Pukenga period.
Yes.
Okay.
But the funding has gone down for
the ITPs and polytech sector over the next budget, so 2026
to 2027. It looks like there's been a cut of around
160 hundred million.
It would be the 99% funding.
So the actual amount of funding that's going to the polytechs next year will be
slightly higher than it is this year.
The area for NZIST is that work-based learning.
Work-based learning has gone down significantly.
So the impact when you take that out is also one of the changes
for the polytechs.
Right. So
look, let's put that aside. There's still been an overall 40 million
decrease. But you're saying that the reason why there's been an increase to the
PTE line is because the polytechs are subcontracting to the-
No.
The new
PTEs which have been established, the new PTEs which have been
established by
BCITO and MITO, they
transitioned out of NZIST and became PTEs.
They had a significant amount of funding.
Right.
So it's gone down-
Okay
... in
what was the old polytech sector.
So it's been reshuffled into PTEs.
Yes. So it's moved.
Right.
And that's why PTEs have gone up significantly.
Did you
need me to come to that? You're right. She's got it. Okay.
No, I'm
I can see you-
No, we're good.
Right. We have a supplementary question from Shannon Halbert.
Thank you. So you said that work-based learning has gone down.
Yes.
Why is that? And
given the high number of apprenticeships that we had previously,
and this budget clearly shifts to
trades in level one and two.
Mm-hmm.
But apprenticeships, as we know, are level three to five, and I just
want an understanding from you, Minister.
What is the plan for the level three to five students and
qualifications? Because you've heavily criticized this particular
point when it comes to apprenticeships.
Mm-hmm. I have. So, work-based learning numbers have gone
down, and that's a reflection of the employment situation
for apprentices out in
businesses.
Apprentice Boost, obviously, during the COVID period, was brought
in, and it brought up apprentice numbers.
However, a number of those apprentices did not
complete apprenticeships. It increased the spend.
Apprentice Boost increased the spend, but it did not
increase the numbers coming out as qualified apprentices.
So it was a short-term boost to keep
people employed by the previous government during COVID, but it
did not increase completion rates of
apprentices. And so again, a program that
was looked at and has been reduced down considerably,
I accept. But the work-based learning numbers are
going down because of the employment situation.
And so, as the employment situation picks up, and
trades, and particularly the construction trade, is
one that gets hit very hard by
economic cycles. As they go up and as the
economy gets stronger, the construction sector will get stronger, and we would
expect apprentice numbers and therefore work-based learning to go
up. At the moment, it's down because of the
economics general-
Decisions. Government decisions
... Well, it's down because of the general economic situation.
The construction industry are not across the
country hiring because
of lack of confidence because of the economic situation.
They will as the economy recovers.
Right. We now have another primary question from Pamjeet.
I'll just let everyone know where we're at.
So Pamjeet, then primary from Shannon, primary from Vanessa, and then
primary from Francisco. Pamjeet.
Thank you. Minister, my question is about the student
tuition subsidies. So that is funded for two years, and my
understanding is that will be looked at at each
budget depending on what the enrollment looks like.
So can you explain to us how that works?
Because already we know that tertiary education institutes are feeling quite a bit
of pressure with the increase of enrollment, which is actually a good thing.
Mm. Yeah, so look, the numbers, for a couple of reasons,
probably three reasons. Firstly,
there is quite a demographic blip coming out of
the secondary system, so greater numbers, greater pressure.
The unemployment rate at the moment is reasonably high,
so that has that impact of more people
applying for enrolling in tertiary
institutions. But also,
the financial situation that we are
in at the moment, we thought it would be irresponsible to
make that kind of volume adjustment further out than two years
at the moment.
That definitely was more-
Right. Thank you. Primary question from Shannon Halbert.
Thank you. So Budget 2026 increases funding to
fund the forecast increase in demand for tertiary education and training
enrollments in 2026.
2027, excuse me.
Mm-hmm.
What's the plan for funding university domestic enrollments beyond
2027?
Yeah, and
a little bit as per the discussion that we've just had,
that we will look at what the unemployment situation
is at that time. We'll look at what the
general economic situation is, and also what the
demographics are. So the demographics are starting to taper down a little
bit. Still a bit of that blip to come through, but we'll start to have a look at
all those. But at the moment, it's a very critical
time in our economy, where we're waiting for the
improvement to come. It's been hit this year a little bit.
The
increase that was being forecast at the beginning of this year
obviously was impacted by the Middle East
situation. As that eases and the
economy starts to grow as was being forecast,
then we'll have a look at what the impact ...
Because the tertiary sector is very much impacted by
what the unemployment rate is.
Right. So the
standalone polytechs that you've established-
Mm. Mm-hmm
... you've had advice from TEC that tells you that they have a
very high financial risk rating.
Mm-hmm.
And then universities, it's well documented that
we've got significant funding issues and
sustainability issues as a result.
So what is your plan, Minister, to address the overall
financial pressures of the tertiary education sector,
given you've got less investment this time round, you've got
less of a focus going into polytechs, work-based
learning, and universities. How are you going to
address financial viability of the sector?
Mm. Look, I think-
If it's not privatization.
I think it's ... Well, it's not privatization, but-
Are you sure?
But I think it's a very good question, because I think it actually
allows us to look at the two different approaches.
One approach, by the previous government, was to
throw money at schemes that didn't meet their objective.
But what's your plan?
Not this budget. Not prior.
My plan, and our plan, this government's plan, is to
take out programs that aren't meeting the objective and
put them into ones that do meet our objective and our priorities.
But you've lost funding, Minister.
So our priority is to ensure that it's
aligned with going for growth, to ensure that it
supports industry involvement in our
tertiary sector, to ensure that impacts on our
commercialization of research work that the universities
are doing.
Which is huge.
So it's not always about throwing more money and walking
away.
Sure.
If I can give the example of PBRF,
the Performance Based Research Fund-
Mm
... where universities told us that over the period of
PBRF, the six years, they spent about 40 million
on the administrative side of it. That is not good
use of money. That money should be going into researchers.
So pulling back into a less
compliance-focused program of the TRIF, the
Tertiary Research Excellence Fund, that doesn't require as
much compliance.
Mm.
It means, yes, we haven't increased the overall amount that's going in, the
315 million a year. But if universities are not
spending 40 million over that six-year period on
the compliance of it, it frees up money to be spent
by the researchers. So sometimes it's about doing things
smarter rather than just throwing more money at it.
Sure, but you haven't redirected.
You've cut
Research being an example.
Well, research-
University funding as an example.
Tertiary education budget
But research funding hasn't been cut
You've finally got the whole portfolio, Minister, and you've lost
millions of dollars for the sector.
No. I've taken-
And today you're telling me that you have no plan on the financial
viability for the future. What is your plan?
That's exactly what I'm not telling you.
I'm telling you-
I think if you go back and listen to the Hansard
... that we have got a very strong plan-
Just as a point of order, Chair
... to ensure that it is better value for money spent-
You're responsible for tertiary education.
My colleagues are in the background
... than just throwing money at it.
Sorry. It's very typical of me to say, I think if you go back and check the
Hansard, you'll find she's answered the question.
But I just want to reinforce that we have a very strong plan
to ensure that it's good value spending.
It's not throwing a billion dollars over the lifetime of
fees free that achieves nothing.
Correct.
It is not throwing money at research that then
40 million has to be spent over that period on compliance.
It is ensuring that you get good value from that
spend. So just throwing money, walking away, not worrying
about the compliance, whether objectives are met, that is not going to be my
plan, but ensuring that good value for the
spend occurs is my plan.
You've lost $57 million.
I've taken a billion dollars out of spend that didn't achieve anything.
Thank you. We have a supplementary question from Vanessa Wienek.
Thank you, Minister. It seems like you've outlined the why for the
change from the PBRF to the TREF.
Mm.
We've also had the science system reforms.
Mm-hmm.
So how well does this change align with those reforms?
Yeah. Absolutely. And so that is part of that wider plan
of Going for Growth by this government, ensuring that our
economy continues to grow. So ensuring that
impactful spending, value for money spending,
ensuring that our spends are aligned, so whether it's
the university research spend or
the public research
organizations or the cores or the
independent research organization, ensuring that we've got a
plan. And certainly, the strategic investment plan
for research lays out that plan. It allows
right across that research sector, from universities
through, to ensure they know the direction that the investment's
going to go in, and that investment is very much aligned
with Going for Growth, enabling impact and enabling growth
on our economy. And I think that's a good point of
certainty and assurance for the sector that they
know it's not going to be just money thrown out everywhere.
It is going to be impactful spend.
Okay.
Primary question, Francisco.
Thank you, Chair. I've got a question that
some people in the student union wanted me to ask.
Yes.
It's around the fees free scheme and the actual implementation-
Mm-hmm
... of it. Can the minister confirm, will students who finish their
courses this year will be able to receive it?
Yes. Yes.
And-
31st of December this year
... will that include students who change their courses so that they can
finish their course of study this year?
So, for example-
If you're in a degree, but you exit with a diploma.
Yes. Yeah.
There were specific criteria in place.
So there were a few instances where people could change their
degree, I think, their qualification, but they're the same as
applied to final years fees free.
So what criteria?
We'd have to come back to you.
Can we get back to you?
Yeah.
But I understand exactly what you're talking about.
Yes.
If you're enrolled in a degree, you've changed to a diploma, and that is the
final year of your diploma. So we'll get that information.
But it's not about it finishing. It either qualified or didn't
qualify-
Yes
... for final years fees free.
Yeah.
And if it did qualify and they finish this year, they have
one year to then be able to claim their refund.
Right. So if it is one of those degrees or whatever that did
qualify for it, and they do choose to finish this year, they will be
eligible.
Well, they'll have to finish this year.
Yeah. But they will be eligible to ...
If they were enrolled in it this year.
Yes. Yeah.
Okay. Great. Okay. We'll get some clarifying answers.
So thank you. Appreciate that. A primary question from Shannon Halpert.
Thank you. $5 million gone over to the ISBs
to develop the secondary school's subject curriculum.
3 million.
3 million?
Yes.
Okay.
How is that work going, and is it going to be ready-
That's from Minister Stanford.
Oh. Oh, sorry. You're talking about not from here, from Minister
Stanford's?
$5 million has gone into the industry skills boards.
Is that my understanding?
That's to support the industry subjects?
Yeah.
Yes. That's not from this budget. It's from the-
Vote education
... vote education
You've talked about this as part of your savings, though, that it's been
redirected.
Yes. Happy to talk about it.
Yeah.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
So will all those curriculum areas be ready for the
deadline?
Oh, we'll have to-
And how is that work progressing?
You'll need to ask Minister Stanford about that.
Okay. So look, Minister, always
Chair's prerogative, ask the question.
You talked about
the funding increase for, sorry,
99% of forecast funding mean for tertiary providers on the ground.
So you talked about that, and we've touched on a little bit.
Mm.
But
with respect to EIT, for example,
re-independent, they came back last year.
What does that mean for them and for every number?
So there's a little bit of misunderstanding around the
99%.
Mm.
So the 99% funding is on the forecast
from MOE. It doesn't mean that individual
institutions will get 99%-
Right. Thank you
... of what they deliver. So institutions will still get their
allocation. If they deliver 100%, that's great.
If they deliver 102%, that can be funded, so they can
deliver 102% of their allocation.
Beyond that, up to 105% if they are
discussing with TEC, and it's in areas of
priority delivery,
such as some of the STEAM subjects, where we've got skill shortages.
TEC may make that decision, but that will be up to them.
So it's not about individual institutions only getting
99% of what they deliver. They will get their 100%
if they deliver it. They can go up to 102%, which is why
the balance sheet is there from
TEC to use to get up to that 102%. And then there's
still an opportunity to go up to 105% if
it's in priority areas and it's agreed by TEC.
So for EIT, I know that
they are in a growth period, which is lovely to see after the
impact of the flooding on them. Of course, we've allocated
the additional 10 million to EIT to
assist with that gap between their insurance funding and the
rebuild of their campus. And so, they are in a place
where they are really rebuilding physically, but also
rebuilding their numbers. And so, I'm sure TEC's very
aware of that.
Yeah, wonderful. Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
We have a primary question from Francisco Hernandez.
Thank you, Chair. Minister, you received advice that, and
I'm quoting from it, "Fuel costs are impacting the
cost of delivery for TEOs and access to classes
on training for learners. This may start to affect completion rates for
programs that require placement, such as medicine, nursing, and teaching."
And seeing from visiting institutions,
there was one class of nursing students that I talked to that
had
a full class of 25 when they started, but their attendance rates have
dropped to seven as a result of having to fork
out money to go to classes and things like this, and with the increased price in
fuel. Why hasn't there been any special support for students in
this year's budget when they were already struggling prior to this with
student poverty, and now with the increase in fuel crisis costs,
that's squeezing them even further and potentially affecting the completion rates?
And
thank you, Francisco, and look, I acknowledge it's a difficult time
for
everyone, families, businesses, students, in terms of
the fuel crisis and the cost of fuel.
And we're all very hopeful that the slight decrease in
price that's happened over the last while and
what looks like
good negotiations in terms of the Middle East settlement-
The four-piece phone announcement.
Yes. So we're very hopeful that that
impact on our fuel prices will
push downward pressure.
TEC is doing good work in terms of keeping in touch with the
providers to see what the impact is.
We would have liked to have helped people right across the board.
We've taken a very targeted approach in terms of a government
in targeting those such as carers and
others that are absolutely critical to being able to continue
their work. But we acknowledge it's making it difficult,
particularly for those that are traveling a distance, but also those that
are going out on clinical placement. So acknowledge that.
Thank you. I do appreciate you're hopeful, but I'm still concerned that
there's been lack of any concrete action in this budget.
Could there be
something more targeted or guidance from the minister, for
example, on suspending
requirements for in-person attendance at some of these courses?
Because if there's no support being delivered for these
students, and they're still being expected to show up to classes, then that puts a
lot of people in really difficult situations.
And Francisco, obviously,
a good suggestion. As a minister, I couldn't step over the
top of the autonomy of an organization to make that
decision. The
organization will have its own statutes around
the delivery of individual programs, and I think
it's for the students associations to have those discussions with the
management of individual organizations.
Some do have more flexible arrangements in terms of
attendance, so it's not something as a minister ...
I don't believe anyone should want a minister to be able to step over the top
of the autonomy of organizations.
But when it's a sensible suggestion like that, I would
hope that the students association are talking to the management
of universities and polytechs.
So is there then anything you can kind of do to help the
situation if the government has decided not to give
any additional targeted support for students?
If you can't issue any guidance to assist with suspending in-person
requirements, what
are the concrete measures that the government can do to actually help students with
appeal costs?
Look, I acknowledge your frustration around it.
It is very much dependent on
a situation that's outside our control, the Middle East situation,
whether that escalates or deescalates, and therefore the impact on fuel
prices. And so,
as I said earlier, we've taken, as a government, a very
targeted approach to where support we think is most
needed, accepting that it has
impacted on students. But that's not an area that we've chosen to put
additional financial support into.
But my question is, I appreciate that there's targeted supports that's been
going to-
groups and others
That the government thinks need support.
Mm-hmm.
But why has the government chosen to make the assessment
that students don't need that support?
I think because of the additional support around them in
terms of the interest-free loans
that can be used for
living costs as well as fees. So,
if you look at some other sectors, such as the carers, they would not have
that facility to be able to support them.
So, there is an avenue for
students to be able to be supported.
Mm-hmm.
There's ... Sorry, there's also, most institutions if
not all, have hardship grants available.
I accept that that's on an individual basis, but there
are
additional supports available to students that just aren't available to
other groups.
Thank you. And one final thought, Chair.
I appreciate that you've raised the course-related course thing.
That's a $1,000 grant that students are able to access to help
pay for course-related courses and such.
Yes.
But that figure hasn't increased in, I think, about 15 or maybe
even 20 years. Is the minister committed to reviewing that in the future to
ensure that it can actually keep up with the increase of costs since it
was last raised?
I'm happy to say I'll have a look at it.
I'm not making any promises, but I'm happy to say that I'll
have a look at it.
Thank you.
Thank you. Primary question from Shannon Halbert.
Thank you. I just want to continue on the financial viability piece.
What advice did you receive from TEC regarding the
increased student fees,
6%?
In terms of the viability of the-
What was TEC's-
... providers
... advice on you implementing another 6% increase to
make up that-
Their advice was that it would then sit approximately
aligned with what the inflation has been from 2018
through to now.
Right. Was there any other further advice from TEC in regards to student fees and-
I'm trying to remember what advice you gave us
That advice came from the ministry
Oh, that came from the ministry. Sorry.
Yeah, so, we provided the minister with advice on the broad level of
income increase that that would mean for institutions
across the sector.
Exactly how that plays out at individual institutions depends on their
fee-charging practices and, of course, whether they choose to go up to the
maximum level they're permitted to go up to.
Yeah.
So, it will have an effect across the sector that
we won't be able to monitor until after the end of the year.
Right.
Where the fees are actually charged.
So, no advice in relation to the implications of those fees
being added on to students?
I'm sorry, I can't remember the exact details-
Anything else-
... of the advice we provided. We're proactively releasing all of our advice
provided-
Thank you. And just in relation to ...
You'll know that a number of wānanga have recorded
deficits. How does this budget address some
of the-
The wānanga are actually sitting really strongly at the moment.
They've got strong balance sheets, and they've had enrollment growth.
And so, I think the wānanga are looking very strong.
Actually, I'm pleased that you brought up the wānanga because I just want to
acknowledge that both-
Thank you
... Raukawa and Awanuirangi have lost
giants from their history.
Oh.
Ta
Mead from Awanuirangi and Emeritus
Professor Winiata, both in their 90s.
Significant giants in the-
Sure
... foundation of setting up those two
wānanga. So-
Thank you. My question, Minister, is actually how does this budget
support the future viability of our wānanga?
Of the wānanga. The 24 million obviously was baked in.
The 24 million annual amount that goes to the three
wānanga to support the
kāhui Māori of the wānanga,
and the fact that they are growing, their enrollment numbers
are growing.
Te Reo funding rate continued to increase.
And as I said, they've got strong enrollment, strong balance sheets.
The three wānanga are looking very good.
Thank you very much, Minister.
A very fruitful hour.
Mm-hmm.
We do appreciate it. We appreciate the officials being here to support as well.
And hopefully between our secretariat and your
officials, we will get those questions-
Mm
... coming back to the committee afterwards, a few things for us to follow up on.
Mm.
And then you'll get post-hearing written questions from us as well, no
doubt.
Very good.
Appreciate you making the time for us to go through it.
Thank you, and thank you for the caliber of the questions.
And Francisco, those detailed questions-
Yeah
... we will ensure that we get back to you. Thank you very much.
Of course.
Thank you.
Next. Oh.
Right. Thank
you.
Oh.
Sorry,
I should have acknowledged the Chair of TEC here as well.
Ah.
Thank you, Dr. Anne Tooney, there.
All right. Officials, we have got a little bit of time with you.
Mm-hmm.
We have it here really as an opportunity for any kind of follow-up
questions. There may not be any, so
if there aren't, that's okay. I know a number of the things you'd said you'd follow
up on-
Mm-hmm
... and possibly what is of interest. But if there are any questions.
Francisco, yeah?
I want to change tack slightly to the proposed
7.5% cuts over the next budget period to the TEC and their proposal to
replace ... well, to enhance the public service
using artificial intelligence. Had any scoping work been done by the
TEC- Um, around the use of AI in
things like automated decision-making, um, prior to
the, um, budget announcements around, um, replace-
supplementing the public service with AI.
Not in relation to the budget announcements, but in our
course of our normal business, we've obviously been doing some work with respect to
AI. We've been working with the sector in terms of the work that they're
doing, uh, working on them building their capability.
Building the capability for our own staff in terms of tools like
Microsoft Copilot, allowing people to start using it, um,
in their day-to-day work,
um, in terms of just training and understanding.
Uh, and then the, for the investment round this year,
uh, we're using it in a very small way as part of being able to,
um, easily digest the information that the sector, um, send
us as part of that assessment process, but then a human reviews
it at the same time. So we're starting to introduce it in a very
slow way, um, and ensuring that we've got all the guidelines and
protocols around in terms of keeping our data safe as well.
We've got some supplementaries around that too.
Mm-hmm.
Um, uh, around the question of artificial intelligence-
Mm-hmm
... and you mentioned how it's starting to be used by, um, you know, the,
the TEC, and it's starting-
Mm-hmm
... to be rolled out. Is the s- is the budget for, um,
you know, AI use and AI training-
Mm-hmm
... is that coming from baseline, or has there been a specific, um, budget
line put aside to, um, enable,
enable-
Mm-hmm
... AI use, um, in the TEC and the wider public service, or is that coming from
baseline?
So within our baseline, um, funding, you may have seen we've been advertising
for a particular role to support us on our AI as we look across our,
our business, but that was work we've already had underway as
part of the normal course of business.
Um, what percentage of your workforce would you say is
AI capable now? D- does the TEC track that statistic?
Uh, at the moment, we've just really been testing with staff.
So we've got some staff who've adopted more quickly than others, and others who are
still learning, like myself.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but we're continuing to track that.
We run focus groups. We set up a governance group across our
TEC to understand where the opportunities may be to
support the sector better and also our staff. Right.
Is the intention to have the TEC
be fully AI capable? And to what extent does that vision
include?
We're working through and with our, with our board what the opportunities are
to incorporate AI into the business that we do.
But recognizing there is, um, a significant amount of critical thinking
and human oversight required. So we're just
moving, um, and growing our capability and understanding.
But we'll also be leveraging, um, the wider sector, obviously through the
Public Service Commission. Um, they're looking at
understanding what all the other departments and areas of the public sector
are doing. Where there are things that we can leverage from other
organizations, maybe in terms of how we, um, respond to
OIAs, in terms of gathering all that information.
There, there may be some opportunities.
So we'll be, we'll be looking at things that we can bring into our business where
they make sense.
And can I just summarize my understanding of this-
Mm-hmm
... question then? So, um, at the moment, the TEC's in
a kind of, uh, experimental and trial phase with AI.
It's not been-
Not experimental. Trial phase.
Right.
Yeah.
Disagreement. But, um- ... uh, but it's not been rolled out across the board
in the organization yet. It's still in the kind of testing phase.
In terms of, uh, all staff have access to Microsoft
Copilot, and so different staff use it for-
Right
... different things. Right.
Supplementary.
Uh, supplementary from Shannon, and then we'll go to Carl.
Uh, sorry, primary from me.
Oh, it's a primary. Okay. Supplementary, Carl, and then I'll come to you.
Thanks very much, Chair.
Do you think that we should have a higher expectation
on organizations like TEC-
Mm-hmm
... uh, and the wider tertiary sector in terms of the speed,
effectiveness, and efficiency at which they uptake the use
of, uh, AI technology-
Mm-hmm
... as we're seeing across the wider economy-
... to ensure that the taxpayer is getting the best value for money, um,
out of our investment into tertiary education?
We absolutely want to ensure that we get the best value for the investment
in tertiary education. We're also very conscious that we
have, um, some very sensitive data.
Mm-hmm.
We have to comply with all of the, you know,
uh, privacy-
Mm-hmm
... and different, you know, data security, those sorts of things.
So we need to do it in a measured, sensible way.
But, uh, I think within TEC in the last six months,
we've significantly increased our awareness.
Um, the tools are available to our staff, and what we see is you see
quite significant step changes in terms of how it's used.
S- so how do you make sure that the comment that you just made-
Mm-hmm
... which I appreciate-
...
is not an easy defense or excuse for
why public sector
organizations-
Mm-hmm
... um, don't drive the AI
use as fast as they could. In other words, why isn't the answer, "We are, we
are going as fast as we possibly can.
We're using every opportunity to improve efficiency, um, of our
technology-
Mm-hmm
... uh, in our organization," named TEC.
Mm-hmm.
"While appreciating there are some things that we've gotta be conscious of."
It, it seems as though the leading comment is always-
Always
... "Oh, we've gotta make sure we manage and we, we avoid doing these things we
shouldn't do," as opposed to, why, why aren't you saying, "We're going full
throttle to use this technology to improve our performance, our efficiency, our
effectiveness," and appreciating that you have guardrails?
So I can only talk for TEC-
Yeah
... not the broader public sector.
Mm-hmm.
So we've established a governance group.
We're looking across all areas of our business to understand where are those areas
we could get the best benefit.
Right.
And then understand is there additional cost associated with that, what does that
mean for our business, and what are those opportunities?
We're also doing work with the broader tertiary sector in terms of ensuring
they've got access to lower cost tools.
So looking at, as a sector as a whole, how can we do
work to see whether or not we can ensure those tools can be delivered at a lower
cost. So we're doing a lot of that, what I call foundation
platform work, and we will continue to build on it.
Using it in our investment round this year is the first time.
That's a very large process that we run that probably has a
lot of opportunities in the future, and so we're doing the first bit, and
we'll see how that goes, and then we'll continue to-
Great
... use that.
Right. Primary question from Shannon Halbert.
Thank you, and my apologies to harp on about it.
But if we go back to fees free,
was it TEC's advice to cancel
fees free?
The advice-
And if so, why?
It's the ministry that provides advice-
Okay
... to the minister on those policy decisions.
And I'm Katrina Sudich, by the way-
Sure
... General Team of Tertiary Policy at the ministry.
In the context of the ministers asking for savings and
reprioritization opportunities, which has been a focus of the budget,
that is one of the
options that we put forward as being one that we
considered would be sensible to explore for the reasons that the
minister set out, that it didn't meet the policy
objectives
of the
program.
And was that advice
specifically aimed towards level three and four
learners as well?
So I understand university
graduates and employment might have a higher income bracket later in
life.
Level three and four learners, so essentially we start to look at
equity indexes.
What's the implication-
No, there wasn't-
... or what was the advice on that particular group?
... a distinction there.
And I think that the fees free we looked at as a whole,
and the thing where
your question goes to some degree is, as the minister said,
there was no increase in people
studying and completing their studies from low socioeconomic
backgrounds. In fact, in some areas there was a decrease, so it
didn't actually reach those particular people who you might want to think about
from an equity perspective. It wasn't an effective policy.
Sure, but if we applied that to work-based learning
who were also recipients of fees free,
and those numbers have gone down, we heard today.
Those numbers have gone down in work-based learning because of the employment
situation. Most of the people in work-based learning need a job, and
when the employment conditions
are tougher, it's often the apprentices that are the first people in an
organization that lose their jobs.
That's-
So that's not related to-
Sure, but it could be related to the Apprenticeship Boost scheme being
cut, for example. What evidence do you have
that says it's employment situation, not by
cutting policies such as Apprenticeship Boost?
We look at the economic cycle data over long periods of
time, and that's been a consistent
tracking to the economic cycle as the volume of work-based
learning.
Okay. And so was your advice to reinvest that
money in full into the tertiary sector?
We weren't asked to give that advice.
So the ministers wanted some options, related particularly
to supporting
young people in foundation
education and trades academies, so we gave that advice.
So just to clarify, TEC didn't provide any advice,
recommendations, thinking to the minister in regards to the loss of a
billion dollars to the tertiary education sector when they're on their
knees.
That funding wasn't going into the tertiary sector.
Mm.
All right. Take them a while to get it.
No, but, but it's still-
The students will still be paying their fees.
Come on
Chair.
Yeah.
If you pull me in, you've got to pull them in.
Yeah, I did just say, "Please don't." Carry on please, Shannon.
But as a total budget, because it's included in both tertiary education.
Mm-hmm.
But the advice comes from the Ministry of Education.
Come on.
But they're the appropriations actually.
It's about revenue, it's not tertiary education.
Right.
Because there would be a shopping list of funding areas that TEC
would identify as needing
money to be invested into the sector.
So that's a-
You don't have a shortage of requests.
So the-
There was no advocacy
advice, request to the minister saying, "Please, can we
spend this money in other areas?"
That's not part of our role.
No.
The area that we did provide advice and conversations with the
minister was about being able to provide additional volume to the
sector to be able to fund the unfunded learners.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you very much. Appreciate that. As always, Mr.
Chancellor, Hart and Lucians.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.